---
title: Nanny Project
image_path:
---
In 2010, the Nanny Project began as a way to give farmers in the village of Hedaru the skills to grow more nutritious food in larger quantity on small pieces of land around their homes. The concept was simple: train 20 people in animal husbandry and gardening, give them each two pregnant dairy goats, and help them learn to support each other as they build their farms. The project requires each new farmer to pass an animal forward to help someone else begin a farm, and pass an animal backward to help support the cost of the ongoing training. The project was very successful. Fourteen farmers qualified to receive animals and 32 animals were purchased, including three breeding males, and from this beginning, there have been many unanticipated accomplishments. Two strong leaders rose up from the group. One man named Tunzo took the lead and directed the entire group of farmers. One woman named Nietiwe became a trainer and started helping other farmers. As a team, they have been able to help every one of the farmers experience success with their goat farms. In some cases, the farmers have added bio-gas cooking systems, new latrines for their families, remodeled their homes, installed clean water systems, introduced other kinds of animals, and purchased motorcycles to use in gathering grasses to feed the animals. They started tracking profit and loss, and now farm as a business, not just to feed their own families. Other farmers in the area are noticing the progress of our Nanny Farmers and want to know how they too can participate. In a rural community that does not easily accept new ways of doing things, people are very open to the ideas this project has taught because they see the results of those new ideas living right next door.